What's new in h5py 2.7
======================

Python 3.2 is no longer supported
---------------------------------
``h5py`` 2.7 drops Python 3.2 support, and testing is not longer performed on Python 3.2. The latest versions of ``pip``, ``virtualenv``, ``setuptools`` and ``numpy`` do not support Python 3.2, and dropping 3.2 allows both ``u`` and ``b`` prefixes to be used for strings. A clean up of some of the legacy code was done in `#675`_ by Andrew Collette.

Additionally, support for Python 2.6 is soon to be dropped for ``pip`` (See https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/3955) and ``setuptools`` (See https://github.com/pypa/setuptools/issues/878), and ``numpy`` has dropped Python 2.6 also in the latest release. While ``h5py`` has not dropped Python 2.6 this release, users are strongly encouraged to move to Python 2.7 where possible.

Improved testing support
------------------------
There has been a major increase in the number of configurations ``h5py`` is automatically tested in, with Windows CI support added via Appveyor (`#795`_, `#798`_, `#799`_ and `#801`_ by James Tocknell) and testing of minimum requirements to ensure we still satisfy them (`#703`_ by James Tocknell). Additionally, ``tox`` was used to ensure that we don't run tests on Python versions which our dependencies have dropped or do not support (`#662`_, `#700`_ and `#733`_). Thanks to to the Appveyor support, unicode tests were made more robust (`#788`_, `#800`_ and `#804`_ by James Tocknell). Finally, other tests were improved or added where needed (`#724`_ by Matthew Brett, `#789`_, `#794`_ and `#802`_ by James Tocknell).

Improved python compatibility
-----------------------------
The ``ipython``/``jupyter`` completion support now has Python 3 support (`#715`_ by Joseph Kleinhenz). ``h5py`` now supports ``pathlib`` filenames (`#716`_ by James Tocknell).

Documentation improvements
--------------------------
An update to the installation instructions and some whitespace cleanup was done in `#808`_ by Thomas A Caswell, and mistake in the quickstart was fixed by Joydeep Bhattacharjee in `#708`_.

setup.py improvements
---------------------
Support for detecting the version of HDF5 via ``pkgconfig`` was added by Axel Huebl in `#734`_, and support for specifying the path to MPI-supported HDF5 was added by Axel Huebl in `#721`_. ``h5py's`` classifiers were updated to include supported python version and interpreters in `#811`_ by James Tocknell.

Support for additional HDF5 features added
------------------------------------------
Low-level support for `HDF5 Direct Chunk Write`_ was added in `#691`_ by Simon Gregor Ebner.  Minimal support for `HDF5 File Image Operations`_ was added by Andrea Bedini in `#680`_. Ideas and opinions for further support for both `HDF5 Direct Chunk Write`_ and `HDF5 File Image Operations`_ are welcome. High-level support for reading and writing null dataspaces was added in `#664`_ by James Tocknell.

Improvements to type system
---------------------------
Reading and writing of compound datatypes has improved, with support for different orderings and alignments (`#701`_ by Jonah Bernhard, `#702`_ by Caleb Morse `#738`_ by @smutch, `#765`_ by Nathan Goldbaum and `#793`_ by James Tocknell). Support for reading extended precision and non-standard floating point numbers has also been added (`#749`_, `#812`_ by Thomas A Caswell, `#787`_ by James Tocknell and `#781`_ by Martin Raspaud). Finally, compatibility improvements to ``Cython`` annotations of HDF5 types were added in `#692`_ and `#693`_ by Aleksandar Jelenak.

Other changes
-------------
* Fix deprecation of ``-`` for ``numpy`` boolean arrays (`#683`_ by James Tocknell)
* Check for duplicates in fancy index validation (`#739`_ by Sam Toyer)
* Avoid potential race condition (`#754`_ by James Tocknell)
* Fix inconsistency when slicing with ``numpy.array`` of shape ``(1,)`` (`#772`_ by Artsiom)
* Use ``size_t`` to store Python object id (`#773`_ by Christoph Gohlke)
* Avoid errors when the Python GC runs during ``nonlocal_close()`` (`#776`_ by Antoine Pitrou)
* Move from ``six.PY3`` to ``six.PY2`` (`#686`_ by James Tocknell)


.. _`#662` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/662
.. _`#664` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/664
.. _`#675` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/675
.. _`#680` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/680
.. _`#683` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/683
.. _`#686` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/686
.. _`#691` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/691
.. _`#692` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/692
.. _`#693` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/693
.. _`#700` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/700
.. _`#701` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/701
.. _`#702` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/702
.. _`#703` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/703
.. _`#708` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/708
.. _`#715` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/715
.. _`#716` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/716
.. _`#721` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/721
.. _`#724` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/724
.. _`#733` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/733
.. _`#734` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/734
.. _`#738` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/738
.. _`#739` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/739
.. _`#749` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/749
.. _`#754` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/754
.. _`#765` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/765
.. _`#772` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/772
.. _`#773` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/773
.. _`#776` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/776
.. _`#781` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/781
.. _`#787` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/787
.. _`#788` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/788
.. _`#789` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/789
.. _`#793` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/793
.. _`#794` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/794
.. _`#795` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/795
.. _`#798` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/798
.. _`#799` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/799
.. _`#800` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/800
.. _`#801` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/801
.. _`#802` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/802
.. _`#804` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/804
.. _`#807` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/807
.. _`#808` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/808
.. _`#811` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/811
.. _`#812` : https://github.com/h5py/h5py/pull/812
.. _`HDF5 Direct Chunk Write` : https://support.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/doc/Advanced/DirectChunkWrite/
.. _`HDF5 File Image Operations` : https://support.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/doc/Advanced/FileImageOperations/HDF5FileImageOperations.pdf

Acknowledgements
----------------
