What's new in h5py 3.7
======================

New features
------------

* Both Apple Silicon (arm64) and Intel (x86_64) Mac wheels are now provided
  (:pr:`2065`). Apple Silicon wheels are not automatically tested, however,
  as we're not aware of any CI offerings that do this.
* Provide the ability to use the Direct Virtual File Driver (VFD) from
  HDF5 (Linux only).
  If the Direct VFD driver is present at the time of compilation, users can use the
  Direct VFD by passing the keyword argument ``driver="direct"`` to the
  ``h5py.File`` constructor.

  To use the Direct VFD, HDF5 and h5py must have both been compiled with
  this enabled. Currently, pre-built h5py wheels on PyPI do not include the
  Direct VFD. Other packages such as the conda package on conda-forge might
  include it. Alternatively, you can :ref:`build h5py from source <source_install>`
  against an HDF5 build with the direct driver enabled.
* The :class:`.File` constructor contains two new parameters ``alignment_threshold``,
  and ``alignment_interval`` controling the data alignment within the HDF5
  file (:pr:`2040`).
* :meth:`~.Group.create_dataset` and :meth:`~.Group.require_dataset` now accept
  parameters ``efile_prefix`` and ``virtual_prefix`` to set a filesystem path
  prefix to use to find files for external datasets and for virtual dataset
  sources (:pr:`2092`). These only affect the current access; the prefix is
  not stored in the file.
* h5py wheels on PyPI now bundle HDF5 version 1.12.2 (:pr:`2099`).
* h5py Mac wheels on PyPI now bundle zlib version 1.2.12 (:pr:`2082`).
* Pre-built wheels are now available for Python 3.10 on Linux ARM64 (:pr:`2094`).

Bug fixes
---------

* Fix a deadlock which was possible when the same dataset was accessed from
  multiple threads (:issue:`2064`).
* New attributes are created directly, instead of via a temporary
  attribute with subsequent renaming. This fixes overwriting
  attributes with ``track_order=True``.
* Fix for building with mpi4py on Python 3.10 (:pr:`2101`).
* Fixed fancy indexing with a boolean array for a single dimension (:pr:`2079`).
* Avoid returning unitialised memory when reading from a chunked dataset with
  missing chunks and no fill value (:pr:`2076`).
* Enable setting of fillvalue for datasets with variable length string dtype
  (:pr:`2044`).
* Closing a file or calling ``get_obj_ids()`` no longer re-enables Python
  garbage collection if it was previously disabled (:pr:`2020`).

Exposing HDF5 functions
-----------------------

* ``H5Pset_efile_prefix`` and ``H5Pget_efile_prefix``

Building h5py
-------------

* Fix for building h5py on Cygwin (:pr:`2038`).
* More helpful error message when ``pkg-config`` is unavailable (:pr:`2053`).
